In such a night as this,
when the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees
and they did make no noise,
in such a night,
Troilus methinks mounted the Trojan walls
and sighed his soul towards the Grecian tents
where Cressid lay that night.
In such a night did Thisbe fearfully o'ertrip the dew
and saw the lion's shadow ere himself
and ran dismayed away.
In such a night stood Dido with a willow in her hand
upon the wild sea-banks
and waft her love to come again to Carthage.
In such a night, Medea gathered
the enchanted herbs that did renew old Aeson.
In such a night did Jessica steal from the wealthy Jew,
and with an unthrift love,
did run from Venice as far as Belmont.
In such a night
did young Lorenzo swear he loved her well,
stealing her soul with many vows of faith
and ne'er a true one.
In such a night did pretty Jessica, like a little shrew,
slander her love, and he forgave it her.
I would out-night you, did nobody come.
But hark, I hear the footing of a man.
Who comes so fast in silence of the night?
A friend.
A friend?
What friend?
Your name, I pray you, friend.
Stephano is my name,
and I bring word that my mistress will,
before the break of day, be here at Belmont.
She doth stray about by holy crosses
where she kneels and prays for happy wedlock hours.
Who comes with her?
None but a holy hermit and her maid.
I pray you, is my master yet returned?
He is not yet, nor we have not heard from him.
But go we in.
I pray thee, Jessica,
and ceremoniously let us prepare
some welcome for the mistress of the house.
Sola, sola!
Wo ha, hoo.
Sola! Sola!
Who calls?
Sola!
Did you see master Lorenzo?
Master Lorenzo-oo?
Sola! Sola!
Leave holloaing, man, here.
Sola!
Where?
Here!
Tell him there's a post come from my master
with his horn full of good news.
My master will be here ere morning.
Sweet soul, let's in and there expect their coming.
And yet no matter.
Why should we go in?
My friend, Stephano, signify, I pray you,
within the house--
your mistress is at hand--
and bring your music forth into the air.
How sweet the moonlight sleeps upon this bank.
Here will we sit
and let the sounds of music creep in our ears.
Soft stillness and the night become the touches of sweet harmony.
Sit, Jessica.
Look how the floor of heaven
is thick inlaid with patens of bright gold.
There's not the smallest orb which thou behold'st
but in his motion like an angel sings
still quiring to the young-eyed cherubins.
Such harmony is in immortal souls.
But whilst this muddy vesture of decay
doth grossly close it in, we cannot hear it.
Come, ho, and wake Diana with a hymn.
With sweetest touches, pierce your mistress' ear
and draw her home with music.
I am never merry when I hear sweet music.
The reason is your spirits are attentive.
For do but note a wild and wanton herd
or race of youthful and unhandled colts
fetching mad bounds, bellowing and neighing loud,
which is the hot condition of their blood.
If they but hear perchance a trumpet sound
or any air of music touch their ears,
you shall perceive them make a mutual stand,
their savage eyes turned to a modest gaze
by the sweet power of music.
Therefore the poet did feign
that Orpheus drew trees, stones, and floods,
since naught so stockish, hard, and full of rage,
but music for the time doth change his nature.
The man that hath no music in himself,
nor is not moved with concord of sweet sounds,
is fit for treasons, stratagems, and spoils.
The motions of his spirit are dull as night,
and his affections dark as Erebus.
Let no such man be trusted.
Mark the music.
That light we see is burning in my hall.
How far that little candle throws his beams.
So shines a good deed in a naughty world.
When the moon shone, we did not see the candle.
So doth the greater glory dim the less.
A substitute shines brightly as a king
until a king be by,
and then his state empties itself
as doth an inland brook into the main of waters.
Music, hark.
It is your music, madam, of the house.
Nothing is good, I see, without respect.
Methinks it sounds much sweeter than by day.
Silence bestows that virtue on it, madam.
The crow doth sing as sweetly as the lark
when neither is attended,
and I think the nightingale, if she should sing by day
when every goose is cackling,
would be thought no better a musician than the wren.
How many things by season seasoned
are to their right praise and true perfection.
Peace, ho.
The moon sleeps with Endymion and would not be awaked.
That is the voice, or I am much deceived, of Portia.
He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo
by the bad voice.
Dear lady, welcome home.
We have been praying for our husbands' welfare,
which speed, we hope, the better for our words.
Are they returned?
Madam, they are not yet,
but there has come a messenger before
to signify their coming.
Go in, Nerissa, give order to my servants
that they take no note at all of our being absent hence.
Nor you, Lorenzo-- Jessica, nor you.
Your husband is at hand.
I hear his trumpet.
We are no telltales, madam.
Fear you not.
This night methinks is but the daylight sick.
It looks a little paler.
'Tis a day such as the day is when the sun is hid.
We should hold day with the antipodes
if you would walk in absence of the sun.
Let me give light, but let me not be light,
for a light wife doth make a heavy husband,
and never be Bassanio so for me.
But God sort all.
You are welcome home, my lord.
I thank you, madam.
Give welcome to my friend.
This is the man.
This is Antonio,
to whom I am so infinitely bound.
You should in all sense be much bound to him,
for, as I hear, he was much bound for you.
No more than I am well acquitted of.
Sir, you are very welcome to our house.
It must appear in other ways than words.
Therefore I scant this breathing courtesy.
By yonder moon, I swear you do me wrong.
In faith, I gave it to the judge's clerk.
Would he were gelt that had it for my part
since you do take it, love, so much at heart.
A quarrel?
Ho, already?
What's the matter?
About a hoop of gold, a paltry ring that she did give me
whose posy was, for all the world, like cutler's poetry upon a knife.
"Love me, and leave me not."
What talk you of the posy or the value?
You swore to me when I did give it to you
that you would wear it till your hour of death
and that it should lie with you in your grave.
Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths,
you should have been respective and kept it.
Gave it a judge's clerk.
No, God's my judge, the clerk will ne'er wear hair
on's face that had it.
He will, an if he live to be a man.
Ay, if a woman live to be a man.
Now, by this hand, I gave it to a youth,
a kind of boy,
a little scrubbed boy no higher than thyself,
the judge's clerk, a prating boy that begged it as a fee.
I could not for my heart deny it him.
You were to blame.
I must be plain with you.
To part so slightly with your wife's first gift,
a thing stuck on with oaths upon your finger
and so riveted with faith unto your flesh.
I gave my love a ring, and here he stands.
I dare be sworn for him, he would not leave it
nor pluck it from his finger
for the wealth that the world masters.
Now in faith, Gratiano,
you gave your wife too unkind a cause of grief.
An 'twere to me, I should be mad at it.
Why, I were best to cut my left hand off
and swear I lost the ring defending it.
My lord, Bassanio, gave his ring away
unto the judge that begged it, and indeed deserved it too.
And then the boy, his clerk, that took some pains in writing,
he begged mine, and neither man nor master
would take aught but the two rings.
What ring gave you, my lord?
Not that, I hope, which you received of me.
If I could add a lie unto a fault, I would deny it.
But you see my finger hath not the ring upon it.
It is gone.
Even so void is your false heart of truth.
By heaven, I shall ne'er come in your bed until I see the ring.
Nor I in yours till I again see mine.
Sweet Portia,
if you did know to whom I gave the ring,
if you did know for whom I gave the ring,
and would conceive for what I gave the ring
and how unwillingly I left the ring
when naught would be accepted but the ring,
you would abate the strength of your displeasure.
If you had known the virtue of the ring,
or half her worthiness that gave the ring,
or your own honor to contain the ring,
you would not then have parted with the ring.
What man is there so much unreasonable,
if you had pleased to have defended it with any terms of zeal,
wanted the modesty to urge the thing held as a ceremony?
Nerissa teaches me what to believe.
I'll die for't but some woman had the ring.
No, by my honour, madam, by my soul,
no woman had it,
but a civil doctor which did refuse 3,000 ducats of me
and begged the ring, the which I did deny him
and suffered him to go displeased away,
even he that had held up the very life of my dear friend.
What should I say, sweet lady?
I was enforced to send it after him.
I was beset with shame and courtesy.
My honour would not let ingratitude so much besmear it.
Pardon me, good lady.
For by these blessed candles of the night
had you been there,
I think you would have begged the ring of me
to give the worthy doctor.
Let not that doctor e'er come near my house.
Since he hath got the jewel that I loved
and that which you did swear to keep for me,
I will become as liberal as you.
I'll not deny him anything I have.
No, not my body nor my husband's bed.
Know him I shall, I am well sure of it.
Lie not a night from home.
Watch me like Argus.
If you do not, if I am left alone,
now by mine honour, which is yet mine own,
I'll have that doctor for my bedfellow.
And I his clerk.
Therefore, be well advised
how you do leave me to mine own protection.
Well, do you so.
Let not me take him then.
For if I do, I'll mar the young clerk's pen.
I am the unhappy subject of these quarrels.
Sir, grieve not you, you are welcome notwithstanding.
Portia, forgive me this enforced wrong,
and in the hearing of these many friends,
I swear to thee, even by thine own fair eyes
wherein I see myself--
Mark you but that!
In both my eyes he doubly sees himself,
in each eye one.
Swear by your double self, and there's an oath of credit.
Nay, but hear me.
Pardon this fault, and by my soul I swear,
I never more will break an oath with thee.
I once did lend my body for his wealth,
which but for him that had your husband's ring,
had quite miscarried.
I dare be bound again, my soul upon the forfeit,
that your lord will never more break faith advisedly.
Then you shall be his surety.
Give him this,
and bid him keep it better than the other.
Here, lord Bassanio,
swear to keep this ring.
By heaven, it is the same I gave the doctor.
I had it of him.
Pardon me, Bassanio,
for by this ring, the doctor lay with me.
And pardon me, my gentle Graciano,
for that same scrubbed boy, the doctor's clerk,
in lieu of this last night did lie with me.
Why, this is like the mending of highways in summer
where the ways are fair enough.
What, are we cuckolds ere we have deserved it?
Speak not so grossly.
You are all amazed.
Here is a letter.
Read it at your leisure.
It comes from Padua from Bellario.
There you shall find that Portia was the doctor,
Nerissa there her clerk.
Lorenzo here shall witness I set forth as soon as you
and but now returned.
I have not yet entered my house.
Antonio, you are welcome,
and I have better news in store for you than you expect.
Unseal this letter soon.
There you shall find that three of your argosies
are richly come to harbour suddenly.
You shall not know by what strange accident
I chanced on this letter.
I am dumb.
Were you the doctor, and I knew you not?
Were you the clerk that is to make me cuckold?
Ay, but the clerk that never means to do it
unless he live until he be a man.
Sweet doctor, you shall be my bedfellow.
When I am absent, then lie with my wife.
Sweet lady,
you have given me life and living,
for here I read for certain that my ships are safely come to road.
How now, Lorenzo?
My clerk hath some good comforts, too, for you.
Ay, and I'll give them him without a fee.
There do I give to you and Jessica from the rich Jew
a special deed of gift
after his death of all he dies possessed of.
Fair ladies, you drop manna in the way of starved people.
It is almost morning,
and yet I am sure you are not satisfied
of these events at full.
Let us go in, and charge us there upon inter'gatories,
and we will answer all things faithfully.
Let it be so.
The first inter'gatory that my Nerissa shall be sworn on is
whether till the next night she had rather stay
or go to bed now, being two hours to day.
But were the day come, I should wish it dark
till I were couching with the doctor's clerk.
Well, while I live, I'll fear no other thing
so sore as keeping safe Nerissa's ring.